# Data-Visualisation-Uber-vs.-Yellow-Taxi
## Introduction
The aim of this research is to explore the effects of new business models emerging from digital technologies and computational innovations. The main area of focus was analysing the effects of Uber on the traditional yellow taxi market in New York City. With the use of data visualisation as a key tool of our research, we explore the taxi market conditions over 6 consequent months and deliver a conclusion from the data and findings. The justification of our interactive data visualisations is based on Alberto Cairo’s visualisation wheel. In order to deliver a comprehensive analysis of the data, we produce a Bokeh dashboard containing four tabs, which allow the audience to see the competition in the market as well as understand the factors a↵ecting market change.
### 1.1 Objective
The objective of this project is to analyse competition between traditional yellow taxis, which were present in the market for many decades and Uber, a modern alternative, which recently entered the market and relies on digital technology. We were able to view and interpret major market trajectories over 6 months as well as understand which areas of New York City were affected the most. Moreover, it was important to understand the target audience for each service provider as well as analyse any external factors that may affect the consumers choice.
### 1.2 Audience
The target audience for our charts and findings is the industry association of the yellow taxi drivers, who want to understand the market trends in order to adjust to market change. Therefore, the visualisation of information must be adapted to the average level of understanding of individuals with no data science background. Moreover, we believed that it was important to make the visualisations clear and interactive in order to provide answers to the main questions and concerns that the industry association may have.
## 2 Data
For this project, we used two datasets containing information the total amount of Yellow taxi and Uber pickups in NYC over 6 months in the year of 2014. The information given in the dataset includes the coordinates and the date and time of the pickups. The datasets do not provide information on the prices or the length of the trips.
## 3 Literatue Review
### 3.1 Cairo’s Visualisation Wheel
The tension wheel proposed by Cairo provides a framework for designing vi- sualisations, which contains six aspects of visualisation, each of which has two opposing features. The upper half of the wheel describes features which con- tribute to the complexity and a high degree of details of a graph. The lower half of the wheel contains features of graphs which are easier to understand and are more visually appealing for users with limited technical knowledge of the subject. Further in the report, the graph design justification will be based on Cairo’s Visualisation Wheel (Section 4.2 and Section 5).
### 3.2 Business Models: A Challenging Agenda
In order to understand market issues and conditions, it is important to be aware of the business models that are applied by the firms in the market. The key attributes of a business model involve linking the workings inside the firm to outside elements including the customer side and how value is created and then monetised. In this agenda, a business model is not a complete description of the firm, but rather a characterisation of the relationships between customers, the organisation and money. When comparing the Uber and Yellow taxi business models, some key di↵erences can be noted. Firstly, the former relies on digital technology (a mobile app) to attract customers, whereas the latter relies on traditional taxi hiring methods. Secondly, Uber structures its pricing system based on the distance of the journey as well as the average demand at the moment of order. In contrast, Yellow taxis charge their customers based on the journey time which is added to the base rate. These features contribute to creating di↵erent target audiences for each business model.
## 4 Methodology
### 4.1 Data Preparation
In order to prepare the datasets for our visualisations, first it was essential to clear the data to produce accurate visualisations. We dropped certain columns which were not adding value to our research, and focused on the date, time, pickup location and the overall amount of journeys. Therefore, we measure the demand for each carrier based on the amount of pickups in certain areas of NYC. For each graph, further data rearrangements were made, such as grouping the values by various factors such as weekday or hour.
### 4.2 Visualisation Justification
When making decisions about the visualisation design, we took into account the audience who were to view the graphs as well as considering the most appro- priate ways to present our findings. Cairo’s visualisation wheel indicates that in technical and scientific environments, the design would preferably have the attributes of the upper part of the wheel. In our case, the preference falls into less complex visualisations, from which the viewer could instantly extract the required information for analysis. However, our visualisations posses features such as familiarity and lightness where possible, as well as being functional and multidimensional. In order to create our plots, we used Bokeh visualisations, adding various interactions such as hover tools and checkboxes.
## 5 Visualisation Output
Due to the fact that the data used was for a period of time when Uber just launched, there was a large gap in the total number of Yellow taxi and Uber trips, with the former being more predominant in the market. In order to produce demonstrative and meaningful graphs, we took random samples of 4.5 million trips for each business model.
### 5.1 Tab 1: Overview
The first tab represents a general overview of the demand of Yellow Taxis and Uber in the market. The tab contains two graphs: a line graph and a supporting stacked horizontal bar chart.
The first visualisation allows the viewer to understand the trajectory of the amount of trips made by Yellow Taxi and Uber in a time interval of six months. The X axis plots the months (April to September) and the Y axis represents the total amount of trips. The users can zoom into the graph or adjust the time frame from range tool below in order to have a more detailed outlook of the change in trips for a certain period. As it can be seen from the trend lines, Uber is facing serious fluctuations, however there is a steady increase in the demand over the six month period. The trend line for Yellow Taxi is more stable, however there is a slight downward shift of the trend line by the end of the six month period. Therefore, an important conclusion for the audience which can be drawn from the first graph is that in the long-run Uber’s position in the market may strengthen, creating serious competition for the Yellow Taxis.
The second graph on the tab gives insight to the percentage change of journeys by Yellow Taxi and Uber each month from May to September. The X axis represents the percentage change, whereas the Y axis plots the months. In order for the audience to immediately understand which bars represent each category, we assigned a yellow colour to the traditional taxis and we represented Uber with black bars. The main conclusion which can be drawn from this vertical bar chart is that there is a continuous increase in demand of Uber trips and a constant decrease of the demand for Yellow Taxi in all of the months apart from May. Therefore, this graph supports the takeaways which were made from the trend line graph.
From a business perspective, the first tab shows that Uber has high potential of growth in the market. When analysing the first graph, the audience should understand that the data reflects the time when Uber was a new player in the market, therefore we see high potential in Uber. The main area of focus should be the fact that at these early stages we already see a positive change of demand for Uber and a reduction for Yellow Taxi.
#### Visualisation Wheel
The first tab consists of visualisations that are functional and light in informa- tion provided. Moreover, the visualisations have the feature of being familiar to the audience and redundancy. The rationale behind our choice is the fact that the first tab serves to be introductory, therefore it was essential to make it easy for the audience to understand and instantly draw conclusions.
### 5.2 Tab 2: 24 Hour Availability
The second tab consists of two graphs which give the viewer an insight of the demand for Uber and Yellow taxis over 24 hours based on the day of week. Each graph has a tick box, from which you can select the days that the user wants to view. The X axis represents the hours (0 to 23) and the Y axis represents the total amount of trips. The visualisation allows to compare the demand of Uber and Yellow taxi at certain times of the day and intuitively guess the type of consumer using the services. For example, we see a high demand for Uber
rides in the early hours of Sunday and Saturday, from which we can assume that the audience for Uber is young people ordering a car after a night out. The demand for yellow taxis is higher in the morning hours of weekdays, from which the audience can make an assumption that the yellow taxis are popular with people going to work.
Furthermore, the tab includes a supplementary table with the pricing structure of Yellow taxi and Uber. This additional information would allow the members of the yellow taxi association to compare the pricing models. Potentially, the yellow taxi association may consider restructuring their pricing strategy and making it less variable.
The main takeaway for the audience from this tab is the insight of the hourly demand for each category. Moreover, it gives an intuitive insight of the type of consumers for each business model. Using this information, the yellow taxi association can adjust their supply in areas where Uber is particularly popular at certain hours in order to gain competitive advantage.
#### Visualisation Wheel
In order to provide as much valuable insights on the demand of Yellow Taxi and Uber, the visualisations in the second tab were made dense and multidimen- sional. At the same time, believed that is was important to use familiar shapes (a histogram) in order not to overwhelm the audience with infographics. More- over, the visualisations are highly functional rather than decorative, so that the audience’s attention is instantly drawn to the main objective.
### 5.3 Tab 3: Geospatial Analysis
The third tab is an interactive geospatial visualisation of New York city, divided into boroughs. The audience can use the hover tool on the map in order to see the name of the area. Moreover, the audience can view the geospatial data by hour by using the slide bar below the visualisation. The aim of this interactive map is to show the density of Uber pickups in NYC. Due to the fact that at the time of the data collection Yellow Taxi was significantly more predominant, we believed it was important to focus only on the Uber data. Therefore, the yellow taxi association can gain understanding of the areas where Uber has the highest demand. It could be clearly seen that the borough of Manhattan is the most dense in pickups, followed by Brooklyn.
Moreover, the tab contains a table with the average income per capita for each borough. This supplementary information would allow the audience to un- derstand if there is a positive relation between income and the demand for Uber.
This information combined with the infographics on the second tab would pro- vide an in-depth knowledge of the main areas of competition. After viewing the second and third tabs together, the audience will have a comprehensive overview of the demand for Uber. After analysing this information, the Yellow taxi association would have an idea of the average type of consumer that Uber attracts (by analysing the pickup time and day and area of pickups, combined with the supplementary tables).
#### Visualisation Wheel
The visualisation on the third tab has the features of originality and density, as well as being abstract. These criteria lie in the upper hemisphere of the visualisation wheel, therefore relate to more deep and complex infographics. We believed that this would be appropriate since it would visually contrast with the previous tabs and would keep the audience engaged. Despite being complex to a certain degree, the infographics is easy to understand and interact with.
### 5.4 Tab 4: Manhattan Hotspots
On the final tab the audience can interact with a scatter plot which plots the demand for Uber against the demand for Yellow Taxi from certain locations in Manhattan. The borough of Manhattan was chosen due to the reason that it has the highest demand both for Uber and Yellow Taxi. In order to make the infographic meaningful, proportionate samples were taken for each vehicle provider. The aim of the plot is to demonstrate the distribution of demand for various travel destinations. In order to do so, we choose a variety of popular destinations and divided them into categories, such as Tourism, Business, Edu- cation and Nightlife. Each category is highlighted with a di↵erent colour on the graph and the audience can use the hover tool to identify the categories. The visualisation provides a further understanding of the type of consumers and the main purpose of travel for each business model. The fourth tab completes the consumer insights for the audience and therefore would allow the Yellow Taxi association to analyse the competition with Uber and understand the market trends and changes.
#### Visualisation Wheel
The fourth tab has the features of density, multidimensionality, yet at the same time is figurative and familiar to the user. This balance between the two hemi- spheres of the visualisation wheel allow the viewer to retrieve valuable informa- tion about the consumer demand.
## 6 Conclusion
### 6.1 Main findings
Overall, in the interval of 6 months we see an increase in demand for Uber and a decrease in demand for Yellow Taxi.
2. The Uber trend line has steeper fluctuations than Yellow Taxi
3. The demand for Uber is at its peak in the early and late hours of the weekends
4. The borough of Manhattan is the central area of Uber and Taxi pick- ups
### 6.2 Summary
Through visualising the patterns of Uber and Yellow taxi pickups, the demands per hour and day, as well as demonstrating the areas with the most pickups our research provides insight on how Uber is influencing the taxi market in New York City. It is evident that Uber has high potential to outperform the Yellow Taxi in the long-run. The interactive visualisations produced by our team would help the audience (Yellow taxi association) to identify new market trends and gain a better understanding of their competitor. In order to remain dominant on the market, the yellow taxis may need to reconsider their business model by adjusting it to consumer needs.
## Bibliography
1. Baden-Fuller, C. and Mangematin, V. Business models: A challenging agenda In-text: (Baden-Fuller and Mangematin, 2013) Your Bibliography: Baden- Fuller, C. and Mangematin, V. (2013). Business models: A challenging agenda. Strategic Organization, 11(4), pp.418-427.
2. Cairo. A. (2013) The Functional Art. Pearson Education, Berkeley,CA
